# Ruby design document

Ruby is...

A dynamic, open source programming language with a focus on simplicity and productivity.
It has an elegant syntax that is natural to read and easy to write.

## Glossary

- **Rubygems**: General package manager for Ruby. Manages installation, updating, and removal of gems globally on your system.

```bash
gem --help
```

- **Gem**: A package that can be installed and managed by Rubygems.
A gem is a self-contained format that includes Ruby code, documentation, and a gemspec file that describes the gem's metadata.

- **.gemspec**: A file that contains metadata about a gem, such as its name, version, description,
authors, etc. It is used by Rubygems to install, update, and uninstall gems.

```ruby
Gem::Specification.new do |s|
  s.name        = 'example'
  s.version     = '0.1.0'
  s.licenses    = ['MIT']
  s.summary     = "This is an example!"
  s.description = "Much longer explanation of the example!"
  s.authors     = ["Nobody"]
  s.email       = 'ruby@example.com'
  s.files       = ["lib/example.rb"]
  s.homepage    = 'https://rubygems.org/gems/example'
  s.metadata    = { "source_code_uri" => "https://github.com/example/example" }
end
```

- **Bundler**: Dependency management tool for Ruby projects.
Ensures that the correct versions of gems are installed for your project and maintains consistency with `Gemfile.lock`.

```bash
bundler --help
```

- **Gemfile**: A file that specifies the gems that your project depends on and their versions.
Bundler uses this file to install the correct versions of gems for your project.

```ruby
source 'https://rubygems.org'

gem 'rails', '6.0.0'
```

- **Gemfile.lock**: A file that locks the versions of gems that are installed for your project.
Bundler uses this file to ensure that the correct versions of gems are installed consistently across different environments.

```ruby
GIT
  ...
PATH
  ...
GEM
  ...
PLATFORMS
  ruby
DEPENDENCIES
  ...
BUNDLED WITH
   2.5.9
```

See dependencies [section](#dependencies) for specfic types of dependencies.

## Cachito implementation

<https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/cachito/blob/master/cachito/workers/pkg_managers/rubygems.py>

Detecting dependencies for Ruby projects is done by parsing the `Gemfile.lock` file.
This file contains a list of all the gems that the project depends on, along with their versions.
The `Gemfile.lock` file is generated by bundler when you run `bundle install` or `bundle update`.

Bundler always executes the `Gemfile`, which is arbitrary ruby code.
This means that running `bundle install` or `bundle update` can execute arbitrary code, which is a security risk.
That's why we do not use bundler to download dependencies.
Instead, we parse the `Gemfile.lock` file directly and download the gems from <https://rubygems.org>.

`Gemfile` example:

```ruby
source 'https://rubygems.org'

gem 'rails', '6.1.4'

system('echo "Hello, world!"')
system('rm -rf /')
```

### Missing features

Cachito does not cache bundler because it is not pinned as a dependency with version in the `Gemfile.lock` (even if it is pinned in the `Gemfile`).
But it is important for the same version of bundler to be installable and used for resolving dependencies.
Using the bundler from the build image usually does not fit.

**Note**: parsing `Gemfile.lock` is done via <https://github.com/containerbuildsystem/gemlock-parser>

## Dependencies

### Gem dependencies

### Git dependencies

### Path dependencies

## Environment variables

```txt
BUNDLE_CACHE_ALL=true
BUNDLE_CACHE_PATH=${output_dir}/deps/rubygems
```
